A sign in Indonesian shows how not to sit on a toilet. Tracy Hunter/Flickr hide caption A sign in Indonesian shows how not to sit on a toilet. You'd think that everyone on the planet would know how to use a flush toilet: Flip open the cover, assume the position and go. But for many people, the flush toilet is a UFO — an unfamiliar flowing object. Nearly 2 billion people in the world use pit latrines , one of the most common kinds of disposal systems for human waste in low-income countries. Squat toilets are still popular in East Asia and the Middle East. And almost 2.4 billion people have no access to toilets or latrines at all — that's one out of three earth citizens. Adam Drolet, project manager for PATH's WASH initiative , says these folks might go in open fields, on other people's property or even in a plastic bag, which is tossed outside and known as a "flying toilet." So a newcomer to the flush toilet might be confused. Drolet learned that fact when he was working on a latrine project for the Peace Corps in Paraguay in 2008. "We started noticing footprints and shoeprints on the toilet seats," he says. "Turns out people felt much more comfortable in the squat position and wanted to continue squatting when 'going,' even if this meant perching and balancing on the skinny, rounded ceramic seat." For the benefit of the uninitiated, bathrooms around the world have diagrams and signs to teach what you've gotta know when you've gotta go. And since today is World Toilet Day , we thought it'd be a good occasion to share the knowledge. (But we have to ask: Do they all do a good job putting you in the loop for the loo?) Thailand: Stand on the floor, not the toilet bowl. A photo posted by Joey Frasier (@joeyfrasier) on Feb 20, 2015 at 7:28am PST Poland: Don't forget to pull your pants down. A photo posted by elisaminondo (@elisaminondo) on Sep 13, 2012 at 11:19am PDT Czech Republic: Step-by-step directions A photo posted by Petr Slavík (@petrsla) on Aug 18, 2015 at 12:31pm PDT Australia: Don't hover over the toilet. A photo posted by libhave (@libhave) on Feb 4, 2015 at 4:37am PST Japan: Toilet paper apparently dissolves... A photo posted by Emified (@emified07) on Jun 8, 2014 at 8:50am PDT China: Try to have a little aim. A photo posted by Ralph Frost (@rhgfrost) on Jul 8, 2015 at 6:29am PDT Malaysia: Don't flush the toilet with your feet. A photo posted by komeil (@komeilsoheili) on Sep 26, 2015 at 10:31am PDT United Arab Emirates: Keep the bathroom clean... and don't do these three things. So, am I supposed to do these things or not... to keep the washroom clean! #toiletsigns pic.twitter.com/bmcoIZcdY8 India: Do not squat! टॉयलेट के इस्तेमाल पर एशियाई लोगों का उड़ा मजाक #toiletsigns http://t.co/8RywDtfeTe pic.twitter.com/Tq8Hs36DZ4